If you want to multiply two integers, is
there a better method than the one we
learned back in third grade?
To give you the final answer to this
question, you'll have to wait until I
provide you with a toolbox for analyzing
Divide and Conquer algorithm a few
lectures hence.
What I want to do in this lecture is
convince you that the algorithm design
space is surprisingly rich.
There are certainly other interesting
methods of multiplying two integers
beyond what we learned in third grade.
And the highlight of this lecture will be
something called Karatsuba
multiplication.
Let me introduce you to Karatsuba
multiplication through a concrete
example.
I am going to take the same pair of
integers we studied last lecture, 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
I am going to execute a sequence of steps
resulting in their products.
But, that sequence of steps is going to
look very different than the one we
undertook during the grade school
algorithm, yet we'll arrive at exactly
the same answer.
The sequence of steps will strike you as
very mysterious.
It'll seem like I'm pulling a rabbit out
of the hat, and the rest of this video
will develop more systematically what
exactly this Karatsuba multiplication
method is, and why it works.
But what I want you to appreciate already
on this slide is that the algorithm
design space is far richer than you might
expect.
There's this dazzling array of options
for how to actually solve problems like
integer multiplication.
Let me begin by introducing some notation
for the first and second halves of the
input numbers x and y.
So the first half of x, that is 56- we're
going to regard as a number in its own
right called a.
Similarly b will be 78, c will be 12, and
d will be 34.
I'm going to do a sequence of operations
involving only these double digit numbers
a b c and d.
And then after a few such operations I
will collect all of the terms together in
a magical way resulting in the product of
x and y.
First let me compute the product of a
times c and also the product of b times
d.
I'm going to skip the elementary
calculations, and just tell you the
answer.
So you can verify that a times c is 672,
where as b times d is 2652.
Next I'm going to do something even still
more inscrutable.
I'm going to take the sum of a and b.
I'm going to take the sum of c and d.
And then I'm going to compute the product
of those two sums.
That boils down to computing the product
of 134 and 46.
Mainly at 6164.
Now, I'm going to subtract our first two
products from the results of this
computation.
That is, I'm going to take 6164.
Subtract 2652, and subtract 672.
You should check that if you subtract the
results of the first 2 steps from the
result of the 3rd step, you get 2840.
Now, I claim that I can take the results
of step 1, 2 and 4 and combine them into
super simple way to produce the product
of X and Y.
Here's how I do it.
I start with the first product, ac.
And I pad it with four zeros.
I take the results of the second step,
and I don't pad it with any zeros at all.
And I take the result of the fourth step,
and I pad it with two zeros.
If we add up these three quantities, from
right to left.
We get two, five, six.
Six, zero, zero, seven.
If you go back to the previous lecture
you'll note that this is exactly the same
output as the great school algorithm,
that this is in fact the product of one,
two, the, three, four and five, six,
seven, eight.
So let me reiterate that you should not
have any intuitions for the computations
I just did, you should not understand
what just went down on this slide.
Rather I hope you feel some mixture of
bafflement and intrigue but, more the
point I hope you appreciate that the
third grade algorithm is not the only
game in town.
There's fundamentally different
algorithms for multiplying integers than
what you learned as a kid.
Once you realize that, once you realize
how rich the space of algorithms is, you
have to wonder Can we do better than that
third grade algorithm?
In fact, does this algorithm already do
better that the third grade algorithm?
Before I explain full-blown Karatsuba
multiplication, let me begin by
explaining a simpler, more
straightforward recursive approach.
To integer multiplication.
Now, I am assuming you have a bit of
programming background.
In particular, that you know what
recursive algorithms are.
That is, algorithms which invoke
themselves as a subroutine with a smaller
input.
So, how might you approach the integer
multiplication problem recursively?
Well the input are two digits.
Each two numbers.
Each has two digits.
So to call the algorithm recursively you
need to perform inputs that have smaller
size, less digits.
Well, we already were doing that in the
computations on the previous slide.
For example the number 5678 we treated
the first half of digits as 56 as a
number in its own right and similarly 78.
In general, given a number x with n
digits.
In can be expressed decomposed, in terms
of two, n over two digit numbers.
Namely as A, the first half of the digits
shifted appropriately.
That is multiplied by ten raised to the
power, n over two.
Plus the second half of the digits b.
In our example, we had a equal to 56, 78
was b.
N was 4, so 10 to the n over 2 was 100,
and then c and d were 12 and 34.
What I want to do next is illuminate the
relevant recursive calls.
To do that, let's look at the product, x
times y.
Express it in terms of these smaller
numbers, a, b, c, and d, and do an
elementary computation.
Multiplying the expanded versions of x
and y, we get an expression with three
terms.
One shifted by n, 10 raised to the power
n, and the coefficient there is a times
c.
We have a term that's shifted by 10 to
the n over 2, and that has a coefficient
of ad and also plus bc.
And bringing up the rear, we have the
term b times d.
We're going to be referring to this
expression a number of times, so let me
both circle it and just give it a
shorthand.
We're going to call this expression star.
One detail I'm glossing over for
simplicity, is that I've assumed that n
is an even integer.
Now, if n is an odd integer, you can
apply this exact same recursive approach
to integer multiplication.
In the straightforward way, so if n was 9
then you would decompose one of these
input numbers into say the first five
digits and the later four digits and you
would proceed in exactly the same way.
Now the point of the expression star is
if we look at it despite being the
product of just elementary algebra, it
suggests a recursive approach to
multiplying two numbers.
If we care about the product Of X and Y,
why not, instead, compute this expression
star, which involves only the products of
smaller numbers, A, B, C and D.
You'll notice, staring at the expression
star, there are 4 relevant products, each
involving a pair of these smaller
numbers.
Namely AC, AD, BC, and BD .
So why not compute each of those four
products recursively.
After all, the inputs will be smaller.
And then once our four recursive calls
come back to us with the answer, we can
formulate the rest of expression star in
the obvious way.
We just pad a times c with n zeros at the
end.
We add up a, d, and bc, using the grade
school algorithm, and pad the result with
n over two zeros, and then we just sum up
these returns, again using the grade
school addition, and algorithm.
So the one detail missing, that I've
glossed over, required to turn this idea
into a bonafide recursive algorithm,
would be to specify a base case.
As I hope you all know, recursive
algorithms need a base case.
If the input is sufficiently small, then
you just immediately compute the answer
rather than recursing further.
Of course, recursive algorithms need a
base case so they don't keep calling
themselves til the rest of time.
So for integer multiplication, which the
base case, well, if you're given two
numbers that have the just one digit
each.
Then you just multiply them in one basic
operation and return the result.
So, what I hope is clear at the moment is
that there is indeed a recursive approach
to solving the integer multiplication
algorithm resulting in an algorithm which
looks quite different than the one you
learned in third grade, but which
nevertheless you could code up quite
easily in your favorite programming
language.
Now, what you shouldn't have any
intuition about is whether or not this is
a good idea or a completely crackpot
idea.
Is this algorithm faster or slower than
the grade school algorithm?
You'll just have to wait to find out the
answer to that question.
Let's now refine this recursive
algorithm, resulting in the full-blown
Karatsuba multiplication algorithm.
To explain the optimization behind
Karatsuba multiplication, let's recall
the expression we were calling star on
the previous slide.
So, this just expressed the product of x
and y in terms of the smaller numbers a,
b, c, and d.
In this straight forward recursive
algorithm we made four recursive calls to
compute the four products which seemed
necessary to value, to compute the
expression star.
But if you think about it, there's really
only three quantities in star that we
care about, the three relevant
coefficients.
We care about the numbers ad and bc.
Not per se, but only in as much as we
care about their sum, AD plus BC.
So this motivates the question, if
there's only 3 quantities that we care
about, can we get away with only 3 rather
than 4 recursive calls.
It turns out that we can and here's how
we do it.
The first coefficient a c and the third
coefficient b d, we compute exactly as
before, recursively.
Next, rather than recursively computing a
d or b c, we're going to recursively
compute the product of a plus b and c
plus d.
If we expand this out, this is the same
thing as computing ac plus ad plus bc
plus bd.
Now, here is the key observation in
Karatsuba Multiplication, and it's really
a trick that goes back to the early 19th
Century mathematician, Gauss.
Let's look at the quantity we computed in
step 3 and subtract from it.
The two quantities that we already
computed in steps one and two.
Subtracting out the result of step one
cancels the a c term.
Subtracting out the result of step two,
cancels out the bd term, leaving us with
exactly what we wanted all along, the
middle coefficient a d plus b c.
And now in the same that on the previous
slide we have a straightforward recursive
algorithm making four recursive calls,
and then combining them in the obvious
way.
Here we have a straightforward recursive
algorithm that makes only three recursive
calls.
And on top of the recursive calls does
just great school addition and
subtraction.
So you do this particular difference
between the three recursively computed
products and then you do the shifts, the
padding by zeros, and the final sum as
before.
So that's pretty cool, and this kind of
showcases the ingenuity which bears fruit
even in the simplest imageable
computational problems.
Now you should still be asking the
question Yeah is crazy algorthim really
faster than the grade school algorithm we
learn in 3rd grade?
Totally not obvious, we will answer that
question a few lecture hense and we'll
answer it in a special case of an entire
toolbox I'll provide you with to analyze
the running time of so called divide and
conquer algorithms like Karatsuba
multiplication, so stay tuned.